Hey there.
This work for example, we're going to take a look at how this what shade works.
It's still quite a simple shader but it already includes
a bunch of the things from chapters 12 and three.
So it's a very nice shader to take a look at
here and there's a bunch of unique things about it.
The main thing is that
I'll just duplicate this
one more here.
You can see that when I
just turn off the scene lights and seen where to go into the material preview.
You can see that it's actually following
the rings of a tree.
And if you change the actual geometry,
you can see
That the texture itself stays in three d. space.
So you can just
do any modeling work.
The texture is still in place.
Okay, so let's go into local view
delete this shader in here
And create a new one. For a fresh start.
We're going to keep this principle BSD are from the side for now.
And start by taking a look at what coordinate space we want to use.
If you think back to the video about coordinate space,
you might already know that what we want to use here is the object coordinate space.
I just adding the texture coordinate node
and take a look at this so you can see
that the texture space sticks to the objects rotation,
location and scale.
But if I change anything
from
with an added mode,
it's still locked to the objects location,
which is exactly what we want for the rings to be fixed.
So, let's start out by using these object coordinates
to create the basic ring texture
which is what the whole shed is based on.
And already while I'm working you can see that. I try to keep the layout clean.
So this note with a lot of outputs where I only need one.
I just collapsed the note by pressing control age
so it only shows the object space which is what I need.
That makes the whole no gravel little bit less cluttered.
Okay first we have to decide what orientation these rings are supposed to have.
Let's take a look at this object uh reset the rotation.
So it's actually oriented in the
world space as well.
And you can see that this is the X coordinate
and this is the Y. Direction.
So what I will be going for is orienting the rings so their axis is along the X. Axis.
And then the rings are created in this orientation.
And what I do to achieve that is just creating a separate X. Y. Z.
Note to split the space into the three components
and then I put it back together.
But I only use two of these components
which means that
the third component doesn't play any role anymore. Which is what I want because the
X coordinate
should not have any impact on the texture because it's
going to be the same along the whole axis.
So if I just
ignore the X. Component take the
why and the zet component here
which are going to be the new accident Y component of this coordinate here.
You can see
that I have a nice texture map which is X and Y
at the orientation of this profile
and it does not change along the whole axis.
I'll just create a new frame here.
Call in
coordinates so we later know what this is.
Mhm
And then let's start getting those rings.
I just create a vector math node
and set it to length
to get the radius
from the X axis. And you can already see how this is going to turn out
and think about this is
if I did not have these notes here,
just mute them.
You can see that it looks a whole lot different
because now the X component plays a role as well
into the length that I have here
And so I have like a spherical
gradients here
but I do not want to sphere, I do want a cylinder
and to do to do that.
I just have to eliminate the X component which is exactly what I did here.
And as you can see,
I get this nice cylindrical
gradient here
and how to turn this
gradient into rings.
I can just do the old trick with repetition
by adding a couple of math nodes where I set the first one to multiply
to just increase
how quickly this
gradient rises.
You can adjust that later still
and another math known
which I said to fraction.
And then you can see I already have this repetition
and I can just scale it
with the multiplication factor.
And this is basically going to be
the input for the amount of rings
that are created.
So
I just choose something and call this note here
brings.
It was just just an arbitrary number for the amount of rings that we get.
Mm.
So right now
this is a very sharp gradient which starts over again.
That is due to the fraction here.
And I want something a little bit smoother.
So instead of fraction I choose ping pong.
But I want to set this factor to one again.
So I get
a value of one at the maximum
of these rings
and this looks a little bit nicer already.
Let's frame these also
quite rings.
And yeah, that's basically already the first step
to creating the texture of this
shader.
And now the next thing I want to do is create some variation in the pattern.
Because right now these rings are completely straight And these variations in
the texture itself only come through the changes in the geometry.
And what I do to get some variation
is thumping around with the coordinates that I use for the whole texture.
And just to get some nice distortion and the pattern.
What I do is adding
a noise texture
and warping the coronets with this texture
and the easiest way to do that is using a color. Mixed note is set to linear light.
So if I just have the linear light here,
the values don't shift overall.
If I were to simply add these values,
the overall value to it shift as well as you can see here
and something you can see here
is that there's noise texture is weirdly stretched.
That's because we haven't given it any specific coordinates yet.
Right now it's just using the generated coordinates.
So instead let me just grab the objects coordinates again.
I just copy this. Not over
so that we have nice separate strings of notes.
And now it's not stretched anymore.
I'll just change a little bit of there's a nice texture
to be more fitting with the rest of the texture,
add a little bit of distortion into this texture as well.
And
now it's time to take a look at the resulting texture here
and this is obviously way too much.
So
instead of variation, we get a completely new pattern.
So what we have to do is dialed the linear light factor way down.
And as you can see
If we just give it a little bit of a factor of like 0.03.
It looks much nicer and it gives it a little bit of variation.
Just just the right amount to make the texture look more appealing.
Mhm.
So let's grab these nodes again,
give them a frame
and name the frame. So we know what it is. Later on
next you want to give these rings some variation but
not in the pattern itself but in the values.
Because right now all of the
lower parts of these grooves
are
Exactly zero
and the highest points are all exactly one.
Which later on when we want to use this texture
here to create color or bump map or whatever map
we want to have some variation.
So
to do that I just add in another noise texture
which is going to be responsible for the value control of this texture.
And here as well. I'm going to take the same object coordinates.
I just copy over the note. In fact.
And now I have to combine this
with the ring texture.
And I used for this here a map range noon
because the effect that I want to create is creating variation in the black lines.
So in the darkest points of the grooves
I want the variation but at the top I don't want any variation at all.
So we have the same maximum everywhere
which is exactly one.
But then variation in the lower part
and what I do for that
it's just grabbing the ring texture and the noise texture I put into the two men input
which is responsible for the values
that the lowest part of the map is mapped to.
And as you can see
it gives us exactly what I described earlier.
The highest points
are not influenced by this
mapping,
but the darkest points are all mapped to this noise texture here.
But I do want to have some more control over how this variation is supposed to look.
So I want to create some
more control over this noise texture with a color ramp.
I just said it to beast. Plan to get a little bit more of a smooth result
and then play around with the distribution of these stops
to see
when I get a pattern that I like.
Which is probably around here.
And now we have some nice variation
where some of these groups just fade out
again,
creating a frame,
naming it
radiation.
And moving on
now we have the main base texture. Pretty much finished.
And we can go ahead and create a color map out of this.
So I just pick a color ramp.
Use the sector
and create some colors.
I'll just go for something like this. But again.
And she's be supplying here to have a smoother result.
And let's just take a look at this.
Okay, This is maybe a little bit too much contrast
and a little bit too much separation.
And this looks a bit better.
Good. We're going to get come back to the color later on.
But I want to already give it a frame
and then what colour
next?
Let's take a look at the normal map. I just take the same texture here.
Plugging into the height of a bump node
and choose this normal.
Let's connect these and first time take a look at the actual shader
and yeah, this looks pretty awful.
But the main reason is that this bump note is way too cranked up
So let's go away lower to 0.01.
And this looks better.
But the profile of these grooves is way off.
It's just linear in both directions.
So to get more of a smooth curve on the top,
we can simply use RgB curves to control the profile of the height.
So right now
the profile is exactly this linear and then it goes down again
but we can control both sides at the same time
by just using this curve.
And what I try to do now is just get the slope of this curve about zero at the top.
So we have a smooth curve here.
And now the fact that the value
Off the top of this group is is still always one
really plays into our hands because now we know that
the value is always going to be mapped here.
If it were to change along the texture
that it might come out like here or somewhere else on this curve
and the slope would not be
zero anymore.
Then the smoothness would break
and it wouldn't work anymore.
So it's nice to still have the maximum at one at all times.
That's again give this a frame, call it normals
and move on to the next PBR map which is the roughness
for the roughness I'm
for now just going to use the same base texture
mm
and add in a color ramp.
Let's just plug it in here
and play around with the values.
What I want to do is flip this around
so we have more
glossy nous at the top
but this is obviously way too much.
So let's style that a little bit
higher.
Get some more roughness in here.
You can obviously still do adjustments when you're creating the shade of yourself.
So this is the basis of the whole shader finished.
Now I want to do some more variations and tricks.
The first thing for that I want to do is create a gradient
along this beam of wood
going from the center outwards
to create some variation in the color.
And to do that. I start out with
the texture coordinates
which I'm going to use the generated ones for now
because I want this shaded to be dynamic
and adjust to the object itself. So when I
changed the geometry
of this
piece of wood to more of a
more the shape of a beam for example,
I wanted still to be
working the same way with the gradient
and the generated corners,
give me exactly that they always adjust to the bounding box of the object.
They go from 0 to 1 on each axis.
So it's collapsed this again
and then create the gradient from this.
I just separate the components
and as you can see, I already got the right one.
I want to use the X component to create my gradient along this direction.
And where do to just
center and mirror of this gradient
is using a couple of math nodes.
First subtracting 0.5 to center the gradient
around zero.
Then I use the absolute
operation
To mirror the gradient around zero
than a multiplication
by two
To make sure that the edges are at the value of one again.
And
that is mostly now I can just add a color ramp,
two
adjust the exact profile of this gradient.
There's a nice string of operations
to create
centered and mirrored gradients from a coronary vector
that's just frame and name this again.
And let's now use it on the column map.
I just add a name
to be known.
Let's take a look at the result here and
and for the blending mode. I choose overlay.
Just to give some simple color variation
and now you can just
adjust however you want the
factor here.
So we have some
brighter areas outwards and a darker center
Just set this to 0.4
and this gives just some nice variation too.
Change the look of the whole shader a little bit.
Another thing to change the look of the colors
but I want to do is give the edges some emphasis
on this scene is
set up for cycles in general. So what I'm going to use is the point in this
from the geometry known,
which is only available in cycles at the moment.
I just
selected and hide the rest.
No, you can't see anything because we're in E V.
The amount. So let's just swap this to rendered
which is set up for the cycles engine right now
and you still can't see a lot. And the reason for that is the point in itself.
It's quite low contrast till let's just add in a map range. Note
to be able to change
the mapping of this.
I'm just going to increase the minimum
and you can already see what this does.
Let's decrease the maximum
and this looks about what we need.
So it's just grab these
another mixer to be known
to this string of color operations
and then
put this on top.
Well this I don't want to use overlay because they don't want to darken
the faces in any way because of the point of this.
I only want to add some lighting on the edges.
So what I'm going to use here is just the color dodge.
As you can see. This gives some quite subtle
emphasis on the edges here,
which is only going to be visible in cycles rendered view.
But with that set up,
let's go back into the material preview because there are
still a couple of things that I want to do
first.
Again,
I just framed this
and the next thing I want to do is
at a gradient of dirt
that is dynamic and depending on the height,
so there is a gradient of dirt from the ground up
and what I do for that is just using a
simple,
diffuse shader
and mixing it together
with the wood shed. Er
I just
turn this into a dirty color
and for now I put the factor to zero because I don't want an overall dirt,
I just want the map from the ground up
and to get that. I use again some texture coordinates first
but this time I'm not going to use any of these
on the texture coordinate note because I want the gradient to be
because I want the gradient to be fixed in the world coordinates.
So instead,
what I use is the geometry note again
and the position coordinates here,
let's collapse this note again
and separate these components
To choose the correct one. So I want the grading to go upwards from the ground
and to get that, I choose the zet component and now you can see
that from the height zero on where the three cursor is placed right now
the gradient goes upwards.
So if I just place
this beam
on the ground,
let's just add in a plane. So we see what we do.
You can see that as the gradient going up
and
wherever I position this beam
by sinking into the ground or pull it upwards.
The position of the gradient stays the same
and that's going to be crucial to have this effect depending on the ground level
to adjust
the gradient. I just choose another
my brains known
and
if the ground was a little bit lower now
I could just simply adjust this year in the map range. Note
by choosing the from men
as this new position of the ground
and then you can select the height of this gradient by just choosing the from max.
Another thing that we can already adjust here is I don't
want the dirt texture to be 100% opaque on top of the
wood texture
so you can just set the maximum
of its capacity
By changing the two max
value.
So I just select 0.8.
If I just plug this in here
you can see there's probably the opposite way around.
It is but that doesn't matter. We can just change these values around here.
Select .8 for the minimum
and zero for the maximum
and there we go.
Now there's a subtle gradient from the bottom up which is just
to the height of the object itself
and that's the shader. Almost done. There's one last thing I want to do
after
framing these
and that last thing
comes into play when I have multiple objects because I just
duplicate this beam. You can see
it has the exact same pattern
and there's really no reason to have the same texture because it's all procedural.
So
there's no problem with having the same image texture all the time.
And to change this
we can simply use the
object in florida
which has the capability of giving us a random value per object.
And we can use that to change around this pattern.
The easiest thing to do this now is to change the noise texture.
Yeah
into 40.
It gives us an additional dimension
that influences this pattern.
And if I just
plug in the random value to the w input of this
for a dimensional noise texture. Now
you can see
that the random value influences
the pattern as well.
But right now they're all very similar.
Still you can see that some of them are really similar
others less.
But the reason for that is that this noise texture is still smooth along this axis
and the scale is quite low.
Then
a smaller change in this dimension
does not make much of a difference in the pattern.
So what I want to do to counter that is adding another math note.
And setting it to multiply
That way we can change the range of this
random value which is itself between zero and 1
Do we between zero and
100 for example.
And
then these changes
make a lot more of a difference.
Now these patterns are still a little bit similar and the reason
for that is just that the geometry is the exact same.
So if you still want to adjust how it looks,
the best way would probably be to just
there is change the position of the origin.
That way you can directly control the texture space
because it's taking the object cornice
and this way you get some more subtle variations as well.
But yeah at this point this traitor is done and
I was interesting. I hope you learned something and it supported the course itself.
One last thing for me to do frame these two nodes
and call them
random.